Add docs about VolumeAttributesClass API (KEP-3751) (#43463)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/storage/volume-attributes-classes.md

---
reviewers:
- msau42
- xing-yang
title: Volume Attributes Classes
content_type: concept
weight: 40
---
<!-- overview -->

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="alpha" >}}

```

This page assumes that you are familiar with [StorageClasses](/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/),
[volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/) and [PersistentVolumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/)
in Kubernetes.

<!-- body -->

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: (nit) the introduction was:

> This page assumes that you are familiar with [StorageClasses](/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/),
> [volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/) and [PersistentVolumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/)
> in Kubernetes.

```suggestion
```

Author: What do you mean here? Remove the introduction title completely or move it to above?

Author: And do we change the StorageClass page as well if we change the format here?

Reviewer: I recommend removing the “Introduction” heading; we avoid having a heading with that name.

No need for _this_ PR to improve the StorageClass docs.

A VolumeAttributesClass provides a way for administrators to describe the mutable
"classes" of storage they offer. Different classes might map to different quality-of-service levels.
Kubernetes itself is unopinionated about what these classes represent.

> ## The VolumeAttributesClass Resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The VolumeAttributesClass API
```

Author: This is in consistent with the existing Storage Class site? Do we need to change the Storage Class page as well?

Author: On the storage class page we call this session ## The StorageClass Resource

Reviewer: It'd be nice to improve the docs about StorageClasses, but that can happen in a separate PR.

Author: Changed both to use ``API``

> 

Reviewer: Do you need to enable any feature gates and API groups to use this API?

Author: Yes feature gates, it is captured in the blog post.

Reviewer: Cool. Please cover the details in the documentation as well.

Author: Which session I should add this? Should it be in introduction?

Reviewer 2: I don't see that feature gate on the feature gates page for the `dev-1.29` branch
https://github.com/kubernetes/website/blob/dev-1.29/content/en/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates.md

If it's an alpha feature gate then it should be added

Author: Updated the feature-gates.md

Each VolumeAttributesClass contains the `driverName` and `parameters`, which are used when a PersistentVolume belonging to the class needs to be dynamically provisioned or modified.

The name of a VolumeAttributesClass object is significant and is how users can request a particular class.
Administrators set the name and other parameters of a class when first creating VolumeAttributesClass objects.

> While the name of a VolumeAttributesClass object in a PersistentVolumeClaim is mutable, the parameters in an existing class are immutable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the name of a VolumeAttributesClass object in a `PersistentVolumeClaim` is mutable, the parameters in an existing class are immutable.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: silver
driverName: pd.csi.storage.gke.io
parameters:
  provisioned-iops: "3000"
  provisioned-throughput: "50" 
```

### Provisioner

> Each VolumeAttributesClass has a provisioner that determines what volume plugin is used for provisioning PVs. The field ``driverName`` must be specified. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each VolumeAttributesClass has a provisioner that determines what volume plugin is used for provisioning PVs. The field `driverName` must be specified. 
```

The feature support for VolumeAttributesClass is implemented in [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner).

You are not restricted to specifying the [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner). You can also run and specify external provisioners,
which are independent programs that follow a specification defined by Kubernetes.
Authors of external provisioners have full discretion over where their code lives, how

> the provisioner is shipped, how it needs to be run, what volume plugin it uses (including Flex), etc. 

Reviewer 4: Can you remove " (including Flex)"?  Flex volume is already deprecated so we don't want to mention it as an example.

### Resizer

> Each VolumeAttributes has a resizer that determines what volume plugin is used for modifying PVs. This field must be specified. 

Reviewer 4: VolumeAttributes -> VolumeAttributesClass

The "resizer" field you referred here is the "driverName" field?  Can you clarify?

> Each VolumeAttributesClass has a resizer that determines what volume plugin is used for modifying PVs. The field ``driverName`` must be specified. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Each VolumeAttributesClass has a resizer that determines what volume plugin is used for modifying PVs. The field `driverName` must be specified. 
```

Reviewer 3: Reference to :https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#use-code-style-for-object-field-names-and-namespaces

---
reviewers:
- msau42
- xing-yang
title: Volume Attributes Classes
content_type: concept
weight: 40
---
<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="alpha" >}}

This page assumes that you are familiar with [StorageClasses](/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/),
[volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/) and [PersistentVolumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/)
in Kubernetes.

<!-- body -->

A VolumeAttributesClass provides a way for administrators to describe the mutable
"classes" of storage they offer. Different classes might map to different quality-of-service levels.
Kubernetes itself is unopinionated about what these classes represent.

This is an alpha feature and disabled by default.

If you want to test the feature whilst it's alpha, you need to enable the relevant feature gate
in the kube-controller-manager and the kube-apiserver. Use the --feature-gates command line argument:

```
--feature-gates="...,VolumeAttributesClass=true"
```

It also requires the CSI driver has implemented the ModifyVolume API.

## The VolumeAttributesClass API

> Each VolumeAttributesClass contains the `driverName` and `parameters`, which are used when a PersistentVolume belonging to the class needs to be dynamically provisioned or modified.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
Each VolumeAttributesClass contains the `driverName` and `parameters`, which are
used when a PersistentVolume (PV) belonging to the class needs to be dynamically provisioned
or modified.
```

parameters:
  provisioned-iops: "3000"
  provisioned-throughput: "50" 
```

### Provisioner

Each VolumeAttributesClass has a provisioner that determines what volume plugin is used for provisioning PVs. The field `driverName` must be specified. 

The feature support for VolumeAttributesClass is implemented in [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner).

You are not restricted to specifying the [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner). You can also run and specify external provisioners,
which are independent programs that follow a specification defined by Kubernetes.
Authors of external provisioners have full discretion over where their code lives, how
the provisioner is shipped, how it needs to be run, what volume plugin it uses, etc. 

### Resizer

Each VolumeAttributesClass has a resizer that determines what volume plugin is used for modifying PVs. The field `driverName` must be specified. 

The modifying volume feature support for VolumeAttributesClass is implemented in [kubernetes-csi/external-resizer](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-resizer).

> For example the existing PVC is using VolumeAttributesClass silver:

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
For example, a existing PersistentVolumeClaim is using a VolumeAttributesClass named silver:
```

---
reviewers:
- msau42
- xing-yang
title: Volume Attributes Classes
content_type: concept
weight: 40
---
<!-- overview -->

{{< feature-state for_k8s_version="v1.29" state="alpha" >}}

This page assumes that you are familiar with [StorageClasses](/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/),
[volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/) and [PersistentVolumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/)
in Kubernetes.

<!-- body -->

## Introduction

A VolumeAttributesClass provides a way for administrators to describe the mutable
"classes" of storage they offer. Different classes might map to different quality-of-service levels.
Kubernetes itself is unopinionated about what these classes represent.

This is an alpha feature and disabled by default.

> If you want to test the feature whilst it's alpha, you need to enable the relevant feature gate
> in the kube-controller-manager and the kube-apiserver. Use the --feature-gates command line argument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to test the feature whilst it's alpha, you need to enable the `VolumeAttributesClass`
[feature gate](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) for the kube-controller-manager and the kube-apiserver. You use the `--feature-gates` command line argument:
```

```
--feature-gates="...,VolumeAttributesClass=true"
```

> It also requires the CSI driver has implemented the ModifyVolume API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also only use VolumeAttributesClasses with storage backed by
{{< glossary_tooltip text="Container Storage Interface" term_id="csi" >}}, and only where the
relevant CSI driver implements the `ModifyVolume` API.
```

The feature support for VolumeAttributesClass is implemented in [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner).

You are not restricted to specifying the [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner). You can also run and specify external provisioners,
which are independent programs that follow a specification defined by Kubernetes.
Authors of external provisioners have full discretion over where their code lives, how
the provisioner is shipped, how it needs to be run, what volume plugin it uses, etc. 

### Resizer

Each VolumeAttributesClass has a resizer that determines what volume plugin is used for modifying PVs. The field `driverName` must be specified. 

The modifying volume feature support for VolumeAttributesClass is implemented in [kubernetes-csi/external-resizer](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-resizer).

For example the existing PVC is using VolumeAttributesClass silver:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  …

>   volumeAttributesClassName: gold

Reviewer 5: This should be silver right?

Author: Oops yes, changing it now.

  …
```

A new VolumeAttributesClass gold is available in the cluster:

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: gold
driverName: pd.csi.storage.gke.io
parameters:
  iops: "4000"
  throughput: "60"
```

The end user can update the PVC with the new VolumeAttributesClass gold and apply:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  …
  volumeAttributesClassName: gold
  …
```

## Parameters

> Volume Classes have parameters that describe volumes belonging to them. Different parameters may be accepted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VolumeAttributeClasses have parameters that describe volumes belonging to them. Different parameters may be accepted
```
_or_
Write “Volume classes” if this isn't about VolumeAttributeClasses.

> <!-- overview -->

Reviewer 6: Each concept page has a frontmatter, separated from the main doc using `---`.
Please check other concepts page for a reference.

> This document describes the concept of a VolumeAttributesClass in Kubernetes. Familiarity with [storage classes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/), [volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/) and [persistent volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/) is suggested.

Reviewer 6: Please save some extra text when appropriate. Also please use relative paths for links. Please wrap the long lines for ease of PR review, change tracking and
downstream localization.

```suggestion
This page assumes that you are familiar with [StorageClasses](/docs/concepts/storage/storage-classes/),
[volumes](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/) and [PersistentVolumes](/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/)
in Kubernetes.
```

<!-- body -->

## Introduction

> A VolumeAttributesClass provides a way for administrators to describe the mutable "classes" of storage they offer. Different classes might map to quality-of-service levels. Kubernetes itself is unopinionated about what classes represent. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A VolumeAttributesClass provides a way for administrators to describe the mutable
"classes" of storage they offer. Different classes might map to different quality-of-service levels.
Kubernetes itself is unopinionated about what these classes represent. 
```

## The VolumeAttributesClass Resource

Each VolumeAttributesClass contains the `driverName` and `parameters`, which are used when a PersistentVolume belonging to the class needs to be dynamically provisioned or modified.

The name of a VolumeAttributesClass object is significant, and is how users can request a particular class. Administrators set the name and other parameters of a class when first creating VolumeAttributesClass objects. While the name of a VolumeAttributesClass object in a PersistentVolumeClaim is mutable, the parameters in an existing class are immutable.

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: silver
driverName: pd.csi.storage.gke.io
parameters:
  provisioned-iops: "3000"
  provisioned-throughput: "50" 
```

### Provisioner

> Each VolumeAttributes has a provisioner that determines what volume plugin is used for provisioning PVs. This field must be specified. 

Reviewer 6: Where does this `VolumeAttributes` come from?
Is it always a plural?

Author: It is what we decided in the KEP design. Because these are volume attributes like iops, throughput, type etc. but they are all different depending on different vendors

Reviewer 4: VolumeAttributes -> VolumeAttributesClass?

Reviewer 4: The "provisioner" field you referred here is the "driverName" field?  Can you clarify?

Author: okay let me add driverName

The feature support for VolumeAttributesClass is implemented in [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner).

> You are not restricted to specifying the [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner). You can also run and specify external provisioners, which are independent programs that follow a specification defined by Kubernetes. Authors of external provisioners have full discretion over where their code lives, how the provisioner is shipped, how it needs to be run, what volume plugin it uses (including Flex), etc. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You are not restricted to specifying the [kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-provisioner). You can also run and specify external provisioners,
which are independent programs that follow a specification defined by Kubernetes.
Authors of external provisioners have full discretion over where their code lives, how
the provisioner is shipped, how it needs to be run, what volume plugin it uses (including Flex), etc. 
```

### Resizer

Each VolumeAttributes has a resizer that determines what volume plugin is used for modifying PVs. This field must be specified. 

The modifying volume feature support for VolumeAttributesClass is implemented in [kubernetes-csi/external-resizer](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/external-resizer).

For example the existing PVC is using VolumeAttributesClass silver:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  …
  volumeAttributesClassName: gold
  …
```

A new VolumeAttributesClass gold is available in the cluster:

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1alpha1
kind: VolumeAttributesClass
metadata:
  name: gold
driverName: pd.csi.storage.gke.io
parameters:
  iops: "4000"
  throughput: "60"
```

The end user can update the PVC with the new VolumeAttributesClass gold and apply:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: test-pv-claim
spec:
  …
  volumeAttributesClassName: gold
  …
```

> ## Parameters

Reviewer 7: I think it's better if there's a description about the relation and difference between the VAC's parameters and the SC's parameters. 

for SC, the parameters fields can holds both immutable volume attributes and mutable volume attributes. 
for VAC, the parameter fields should hold mutable volume attributes and takes precedence over the SC's parameters fields if there's any conflict between them when creating a volume.

Author: for SC, the parameters fields can holds both immutable volume attributes and mutable volume attributes. This may not be accurate, we may want to encourage users to put mutable attributes in VAC instead of SC. 

We

> Volume Classes have parameters that describe volumes belonging to the volume class. Different parameters may be accepted depending on the provisioner or the resizer. For example, the value `4000`, for the parameter `iops`, and the parameter `throughput` are specific to GCE PD. When a parameter is omitted, some default is used.

Reviewer 7: > When a parameter is omitted, some default is used.

After a user apply the PVC with a different VolumeAttributesClass, if some parameters are omitted in the target VolumeAttributesClass, the default value of the parameters may be used but it is not guaranteed. Because its behavior is determined by a specific CSI driver implementation. Please refer to the related CSI driver documentation for more details.

> Volume Classes have parameters that describe volumes belonging to the volume class. Different parameters may be accepted depending on the provisioner or the resizer. For example, the value `4000`, for the parameter `iops`, and the parameter `throughput` are specific to GCE PD. When a parameter is omitted, some default is used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Volume Classes have parameters that describe volumes belonging to them. Different parameters may be accepted
depending on the provisioner or the resizer. For example, the value `4000`, for the parameter `iops`,
and the parameter `throughput` are specific to GCE PD. When a parameter is omitted, the default is used.
```

> There can be at most 512 parameters defined for a VolumeAttributesClass. The total length of the parameters object including its keys and values cannot exceed 256 KiB.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There can be at most 512 parameters defined for a VolumeAttributesClass.
The total length of the parameters object including its keys and values cannot exceed 256 KiB.
```
